MGMT-7309: enhancement proposal for ARM64 CPU architecture support (#2305)
openshift/assisted-service: docs/enhancements/arm64-cpu-architecture.md

---
title: arm64-cpu-architecture
authors:
  - "@danielerez"
creation-date: 2021-07-29
last-updated: 2021-07-29
---

# ARM64 CPU architecture support

## Summary

The default host CPU architecture supported for installation is x86_64 in Assisted Installer. In order to support additional CPU architectures, the assisted-service should accept and handle selection of arm64 CPU architecture as well.

## Motivation

Although x86_64 is popular in many use cases, other CPU architectures are common in other segments.  For example, ARM is popular in edge use cases.  OpenShift has recently added support for arm64 and it is important to add this support to Assisted Installer.

### Goals

* Allow installation of clusters that are running on arm64 hosts.
* The introduced infrastructure should facilitate future support of more architectures (e.g. PPC).

### Non-Goals

> * The assisted-service will remain for x86_64 only.

Reviewer: I was a bit confused by the phrasing here. What do you say if we say something like: 

```suggestion
* The assisted-service and assisted-image-service will not be built for arm64.
```

Author: indeed, will add.

* No support for clusters with hosts of multiple architectures (e.g. x86_64 + arm64).

> * Implementation for kube-api (though design should take into account).

Reviewer: Unsure of what you mean by this?

Author: Just that changes in ClusterImageSet CRD and the operator are out of the scope in this phase.

* Day2 and late-binding won't be supporting in first phase.

## Proposal

### Host images

> The following images should be built also to arm64:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following images should also be built for arm64:
```

Author: sure, will fix:)

  * assisted-installer
  * assisted-installer-controller
  * assisted-installer-agent

This should be handled in similar to the current flows by modifying relevant Dockerfiles to support arm64 build. The images should be published to the same registries and follow same naming conventions. I.e. The best approach would be using the same image URI for any architecture. Which means, minimal changes in the assisted-service, as the architecture specific image would be fetched according to the machine pulling the image.

### OCP versions

[Versions](https://github.com/openshift/assisted-service/blob/master/internal/versions/versions.go) should
have CPU architecture granularity for each API. So that OCP release images and RHCOS images of multiple architectures could be supported.

The assisted-service should support the arm64 variant of RHCOS images and OCP release image (for OpenShift >= 4.9).

> The OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS environment variable should include Release/RHCOS images of multiple architectures for versions >= 4.9.

Reviewer: Is backwards compatibility going to be guaranteed? 

Is it expected that users specifying a `4.9` image will have to use only the new format? Anyway to automatically convert from the old version of this variable to the new one?

Just mentioning things that may be worth noting in this enhancement.

Author: So the old format will still be supported (for backwards compatibility indeed). But, in order to use multiple architectures the proper images would have to be specified using the new format. So it is expected to use the new format if additional architectures are needed.

Reviewer 2: If we're breaking compatibility, this may be the right opportunity to separate the definition of openshift release images from RHCOS images, and specify each separately as the kube API does. Perhaps `OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS` and `RHCOS_VERSIONS`. That would eliminate a lot of confusion and duplication. @avishayt WDYT?

Reviewer 3: @mhrivnak Can you provide an example of `OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS` and `RHCOS_VERSIONS`?  What would this break for existing customers?

Reviewer 2: Something like what's below. The enhancement proposes maintaining compatibility with the old OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS format in parallel with a new format. I'm just adjusting that new format here to put RHCOS image data elsewhere. The new format is backward-incompatible, but the key is to support both formats concurrently.

OS_IMAGES
```
"4.9": {
      "x86_64": {
            "url": "https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/x86_64/dependencies/rhcos/pre-release/latest-4.9/rhcos-live.x86_64.iso",
            "rootfsurl": "https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/x86_64/dependencies/rhcos/pre-release/latest-4.9/rhcos-live-rootfs.x86_64.img",
            "version": "49.84.202107032011-0"
      },
}
```

OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS
```
"4.9": {
   "display_name": "4.9.0-0.nightly",
   "support_level": "beta",
   "version": "4.9.0-0.nightly-2021-07-05-092650",
   "image": "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release-nightly:4.9.0-0.nightly-2021-07-05-092650",
}
```

Since we extract the openshift-baremetal-install binary in the assisted-service (to create the manifests of the cluster), the x86_64 OCP release image has to be used. Which means that both arm64 and x86_64 release images must be provided.
  * Should we perhaps add another URL for the x86_64 release image in ClusterImageSet?
  * Maybe we could assume that a x86_64 release image is available by default for each 'y-stream' version?
  * As a workaround, we could use something like [qemu-user-static](https://github.com/multiarch/qemu-user-static), which enables invocation of multi-architecture containers using QEMU. I.e it might be sufficient just for running the arm64 openshift-baremetal-install binary, though not sure we want to rely on such solution.

##### AgentServiceConfig
`osImages` property currently contains a single set of images for each OCP version.
E.g.
```
osImages:
- openshiftVersion: '4.8'
  rootFSUrl: https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/4.8/4.8.2/rhcos-live-rootfs.x86_64.img
  url: https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/4.8/4.8.2/rhcos-4.8.2-x86_64-live.x86_64.iso
  version: 48.84.202107202156-0
```

> We should consider API changes to support multiple architectures for each version. Perhaps just add `cpuArchitecture` property for each image, i.e. multiple images for each version. Would need to modify parsing handling obviously.

Reviewer: I like the idea of just adding a `cpuArchitecture` field but I also think it would be better for us to be consistent with the structure used elsewhere.

That said, the current structure is already inconsistent with the `OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS` one so I guess adding the field should do it

### CPU_ARCHITECTURES environment variable

The supported CPU architectures will be defined in CPU_ARCHITECTURES environment variable. The default should be: 'x86_64,arm64'.
As arm64 is not supported for older OCP versions (<4.9), it could be validated against OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS only for OCP >=4.9.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an Assisted-Installer user, I need to install a cluster on non x86_64 hosts.

#### Story 2

As an Assisted-Installer user, I need to install a Single-Node OpenShift cluster on an arm64 host.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

* The current focus is for SNO flows, but other scenarios could be supported.

* Late binding is not covered by this enhancement, but decoupling the discovery ISO generation from the cluster should be simple enough. I.e. adding `cpu_architecture` property to `infraenv_create_params` and override the architecture defined in the cluster. Also, architecture validation should be probably added to host discovery conditions (i.e. to ensure that the host CPU architecture is similar to the cluster's architecture).

### Open Questions

> 

Reviewer 4: Do we need to do anything in order to accommodate CNV and LSO operators?
Users can enable them from AI UI, unsure what will be the result on ARM.

Author: @gamli75 do you know if these operators support arm? maybe we could just disable the installation on arm for now?

Reviewer 2: Both are out of scope for the first OCP deliverable of arm support.

Reviewer 3: Good call @eranco74 .  We have the following validations:
      - 'lso-requirements-satisfied'
      - 'ocs-requirements-satisfied'
      - 'cnv-requirements-satisfied'
We already check various cluster properties when deciding if those validations pass or fail.  We should add a check to ensure that the CPU architecture equals x86_64.

#### kube-api considerations

##### ClusterImageSet

> Since we extract the openshift-baremetal-install binary in the assisted-service (to create the manifests of the cluster), the x86_64 OCP release image has to be used. Which means that both arm64 and x86_64 release images must be provided.

Reviewer 2: It looks like we will not need an entire x86_64 payload just to get the binary: https://github.com/openshift/oc/pull/816

Author: Turns out it's only supported for none platform, so we'll try to use openshift-install

>   * Should we perhaps add another URL for the x86_64 release image in ClusterImageSet?

Author: Seems that manifest list won't be supported for payload images in 4.9.

>   * Maybe we could assume that a x86_64 release image is available by default for each 'y-stream' version?

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "for each `y-stream` version"? I'm not sure how that relates to a ClusterImageSet, which references a specific openshift release.

## Proposal

### Host images

The following images should also be built for arm64:
  * assisted-installer
  * assisted-installer-controller
  * assisted-installer-agent

This should be handled in similar to the current flows by modifying relevant Dockerfiles to support arm64 build. The images should be published to the same registries and follow same naming conventions. I.e. The best approach would be using the same image URI for any architecture. Which means, minimal changes in the assisted-service, as the architecture specific image would be fetched according to the machine pulling the image.

### OCP versions

[Versions](https://github.com/openshift/assisted-service/blob/master/internal/versions/versions.go) should
have CPU architecture granularity for each API. So that OCP release images and RHCOS images of multiple architectures could be supported.

The assisted-service should support the arm64 variant of RHCOS images and OCP release image (for OpenShift >= 4.9).

As a preparation for supporting multiple CPU architectures in Version, the RHCOS images information from OPENSHIFT_VERSIONS environment variable should be extracted into a new variable (e.g. RHCOS_VERSIONS).

> We should probably use a simple array structure instead of mapping, to align with the [AgentServiceConfig](https://github.com/openshift/assisted-service/blob/77cb9d3348dafd2abd61fd7c8066e7e7a7805d95/config/samples/agent-install.openshift.io_v1beta1_agentserviceconfig.yaml#L18-L22) structure.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure this is an important consideration. I'd rather the structure @mhrivnak suggested in https://github.com/openshift/assisted-service/pull/2305#discussion_r681169284.

Author: Good point, perhaps we should just keep using the current structure, for example as already used in https://github.com/openshift/assisted-image-service#configuration (RHCOS_VERSIONS).
Since the operator have to parse the json object any way (and only once), maybe it's better to keep the mapping?
@flaper87 @mhrivnak wdyt?

Author: So we'll try to align with the k8s API convention if not too cumbersome: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#lists-of-named-subobjects-preferred-over-maps
